Added content to administering-jenkins-on-kubernetes.adoc (#5503)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/book/system-administration/administering-jenkins-on-kubernetes.adoc

:toc: left
endif::[]

= Administering Jenkins on Kubernetes

> In this section, we will look at,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will look at:
```
Since the next section is a list, the ":" should lead into the list

> * Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another.
> ** How to upgrade the version of Kubernetes in your cluster.
> ** Upgrade Kubernetes Cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project.
> 
> * Upgrade Jenkins Inside a Docker Container.
> 
> * Kubernetes Concepts.
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another.
* How to upgrade the version of Kubernetes in your cluster.
* Upgrade Kubernetes Cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project.
* Upgrade Jenkins Inside a Docker Container.
* Kubernetes Concepts.
```
Align and make list consistent, one * vs ** will present the information oddly

== Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another:

Kubernetes (K8s) is an open-source system for automating deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications.

A Kubernetes cluster adds a new automation layer to Jenkins. Kubernetes makes sure that resources are used effectively and that your servers and underlying infrastructure are not overloaded. Kubernetes' ability to orchestrate container deployment ensures that Jenkins always has the right amount of resources available.

=== How to upgrade the version of Kubernetes in your cluster:

> Upgrading your Kubernetes cluster is one of the tasks you must take on as an operator of Jenkins X. Kubernetes comes out with link:https://kubernetes.io/releases[new releases] regularly, and will only maintain releases for the three latest versions. Meaning if something breaks, or there is a security issue on an older version, Kubernetes will not fix it, but ask you to upgrade. All the major cloud providers only support a given set of latest versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrading your Kubernetes cluster is one of the tasks you must take on as an operator of Jenkins X. 
Kubernetes comes out with link:https://kubernetes.io/releases[new releases] regularly, and will only maintain releases for the three latest versions.
Therefore, if something breaks or there is a security issue on an older version, Kubernetes will not fix it, but ask you to upgrade.
All the major cloud providers only support a given set of latest versions.
```
same as above, clean up formatting for text review (minor)

> Jenkins X at the moment supports kubernetes versions 1.20 and 1.21. Version 1.22 introduces a lot of deprecations, and is not fully supported yet. In the future we aim to support the same set of versions supported by the major cloud providers, Google, Amazon and Azure. These versions are described in the links below, ranging from version 1.20 to version 1.24.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jenkins X currently supports Kubernetes versions 1.20 and 1.21.
Version 1.22 introduces a lot of deprecations, and is not fully supported yet.
We aim to support the same set of versions supported by the major cloud providers, Google, Amazon and Azure.
These versions are described in the links below, ranging from version 1.20 to version 1.24.
```
updated the formatting a bit (same as above), fixed a small capitalization

* link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/kubernetes-versions.html[Amazon]
* link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/supported-kubernetes-versions?tabs=azure-cli#aks-kubernetes-release-calendar[Azure]
* link:https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/release-notes[Google]

*Upgrade Procedure:*

> * It is highly recommended to test upgrades on a separate cluster, where you have all the same setup as you use in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is highly recommended to test upgrades on a separate cluster, where you have the same environment used in production.
```

small wording suggestion, not required change

> * Run link:https://github.com/FairwindsOps/pluto[Pluto] to find any deprecated CRDs present in your cluster. You can run Pluto both on the cluster using 'pluto detect-helm', and on the files on your cluster repository using 'pluto detect-files'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Run link:https://github.com/FairwindsOps/pluto[Pluto] to find any deprecated CRDs present in your cluster.
You can run Pluto on the cluster using 'pluto detect-helm' and on the files on your cluster repository using 'pluto detect-files'.
```
formatting, remove some unnecessary wording

* Cross-check the list of deprecations you find, with the list from link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-guide[Kubernetes] and see what is required for the Kubernetes version you want to upgrade to.

* Fix what needs to be fixed, and deploy the changes.

> * You may now start the upgrade of Kubernetes.
> ** The process has two steps, first, you need to upgrade the control plane, and next upgrade the nodes. Follow the upgrade steps according to your cloud provider.
> *** link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html[Amazon]
> *** link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/upgrade-cluster?tabs=azure-cli[Azure]
> *** link:https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/upgrading-a-cluster[Google]
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may now start the upgrade of Kubernetes.
The process has two steps: 
. Upgrade the control plane.
. Upgrade the nodes. 

Follow the upgrade steps according to your cloud provider.
* link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html[Amazon]
* link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/upgrade-cluster?tabs=azure-cli[Azure]
* link:https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/upgrading-a-cluster[Google]
```
formatting update, some syntax updates

* Pour yourself a cup of your favorite drink while you sit back and wait for the magic to happen.

=== Upgrade Kubernetes Cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project:

*Requirements:*

> * Create link:https://issues.jenkins.io[Jira] Ticket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create a link:https://issues.jenkins.io[Jira] Ticket.
```

* Announce on:
** link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/status[Jenkins Status] page.
** IRC, channel #jenkins-infra on freenode.
** link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkins-infra[Jenkins Infrastructure and Dev Mailing list]
** link:https://twitter.com/jenkinsci/[Twitter], in case of major upgrade.

> *  Review Release Changelogs:
> ** link:https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/CHANGELOG[Kubernetes]
> ** link:https://github.com/Azure/AKS/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md[AKS]
> 
> * Review and merge important pull request from link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/charts[jenkins-infra/charts].
> 
> * Block k8smgmnt job on infra.ci

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Review Release Changelogs:
* link:https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/CHANGELOG[Kubernetes]
* link:https://github.com/Azure/AKS/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md[AKS]

Review and merge important pull request from link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/charts[jenkins-infra/charts].

Block k8smgmnt job on infra.ci
```
If the * are intended to help create a list, would using the "." to create an ordered/numbered list work as well? This would provide a better idea of if these are steps/instructions or best practices. Since the process is upgrading Kubernetes, maybe it should be numbered steps? The "*" can still be used to denote secondary items in the numbered list, but just using the * may not display properly in the guide.

> * Pagerduty
> ** Bump kubectl docker image link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/docker-helmfile[docker-helmfile] to the targeted kubernetes controller version.
> ** Apply in the jenkins-infra/charts repo: https://github.com/jenkins-infra/charts/pull/1056
> 
> * Search for deprecated Kubernetes resources
> ** link:https://github.com/FairwindsOps/pluto[Pluto] running 'pluto detect-helm -owide'
> 
> *Note:* If you want to learn more about upgrades please link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/documentation/tree/main/maintenance/kubernetes[click here!]
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pagerduty
* Bump kubectl docker image link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/docker-helmfile[docker-helmfile] to the targeted kubernetes controller version.
* Apply in the jenkins-infra/charts repo: https://github.com/jenkins-infra/charts/pull/1056.

Search for deprecated Kubernetes resources.
* link:https://github.com/FairwindsOps/pluto[Pluto] running 'pluto detect-helm -owide'

NOTE: If you want to learn more about upgrades please link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/documentation/tree/main/maintenance/kubernetes[refer to this link]!

```
Same as above regarding the steps/list, updated the note to be a note admonition so that it has a more pronounced look

== Upgrade Jenkins Inside a Docker Container:

First identify your image.

----

$ docker ps --format "{{.ID}}: {{.Image}} {{.Names}}"
3d2fb2ab2ca5: jenkins-docker jenkins-docker_1

----

Then login into the image as root.

----

$ docker container exec -u 0 -it jenkins-docker_1 /bin/bash

----

Now you are inside the container, download the 'jenkins.war' file from the official site like.

----

# wget wget http://updates.jenkins-ci.org/download/war/2.176.1/jenkins.war

----

Replace the version with the one that fits to you.

The next step is to move that file and replace the oldest one.

----

# mv ./jenkins.war /usr/share/jenkins/

----

Then change permissions.

----

# chown jenkins:jenkins /usr/share/jenkins/jenkins.war

----

The last step is to logout from the container and restart it.

----

$ docker restart jenkins-docker_1

----

You can verify that update was successful by access to you Jenkins url.

== Kubernetes Concepts:

> The Concepts section helps you learn about the parts of the Kubernetes system and the abstractions Kubernetes uses to represent your cluster, and helps you obtain a deeper understanding of how Kubernetes works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Concepts section helps you learn about the parts of the Kubernetes system, the abstractions Kubernetes uses to represent your cluster, and helps you obtain a deeper understanding of how Kubernetes works.
```

small wording suggestion

> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/[Overview:]* Kubernetes is a portable, extensible, open source platform for managing containerized workloads and services, that facilitates both declarative configuration and automation. It has a large, rapidly growing ecosystem. Kubernetes services, support, and tools are widely available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/[Overview]: Kubernetes is a portable, extensible, open source platform for managing containerized workloads and services, that facilitates both declarative configuration and automation. 
It has a large, rapidly growing ecosystem.
Kubernetes services, support, and tools are widely available.
```
formatting suggestion

> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/[Cluster Architecture:]* The architectural concepts behind Kubernetes.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/[Containers:]* Technology for packaging an application along with its runtime dependencies.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/windows/[Windows in Kubernetes]*
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/[Workloads:]* Understand Pods, the smallest deployable compute object in Kubernetes, and the higher-level abstractions that help you to run them.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/[Services, Load Balancing, and Networking:]* Concepts and resources behind networking in Kubernetes.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/[Storage:]* Ways to provide both long-term and temporary storage to Pods in your cluster.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/[Configuration:]* Resources that Kubernetes provides for configuring Pods.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/[Security:]* Concepts for keeping your cloud-native workload secure.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/[Policies:]* Policies you can configure that apply to groups of resources.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/[Scheduling, Preemption and Eviction:]* In Kubernetes, scheduling refers to making sure that Pods are matched to Nodes so that the kubelet can run them. Preemption is the process of terminating Pods with lower Priority so that Pods with higher Priority can schedule on Nodes. Eviction is the process of proactively terminating one or more Pods on resource-starved Nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/[Cluster Architecture]: The architectural concepts behind Kubernetes.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/[Containers]: Technology for packaging an application along with its runtime dependencies.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/windows/[Windows in Kubernetes]

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/[Workloads]: Understand Pods, the smallest deployable compute object in Kubernetes, and the higher-level abstractions that help you to run them.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/[Services, Load Balancing, and Networking]: Concepts and resources behind networking in Kubernetes.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/[Storage]: Ways to provide both long-term and temporary storage to Pods in your cluster.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/[Configuration]: Resources that Kubernetes provides for configuring Pods.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/[Security]: Concepts for keeping your cloud-native workload secure.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/[Policies]: Policies you can configure that apply to groups of resources.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/[Scheduling, Preemption and Eviction]: In Kubernetes, scheduling refers to making sure that Pods are matched to Nodes so that the kubelet can run them.
Preemption is the process of terminating Pods with lower priority so that Pods with higher priority can schedule on Nodes.
Eviction is the process of proactively terminating one or more Pods on resource-starved Nodes.
```
same list suggestions as above, if these are steps they can be numbered, otherwise they would not need to be indented so far

> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/[Cluster Administration:]* Lower-level detail relevant to creating or administering a Kubernetes cluster.
> 
> * *link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/[Extending Kubernetes:]* Different ways to change the behavior of your Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/[Cluster Administration]: Lower-level detail relevant to creating or administering a Kubernetes cluster.

* link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/[Extending Kubernetes]: Different ways to change the behavior of your Kubernetes cluster.
```
small formatting suggestion as above

:toc: left
endif::[]

= Administering Jenkins on Kubernetes

In this section, we will look at:

* Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another.
* How to upgrade the version of Kubernetes in your cluster.
* Upgrade Kubernetes cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project.
* Upgrade Jenkins Inside a Docker Container.

> * Kubernetes Concepts.
> == Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Kubernetes Concepts.

== Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another:
```
just making sure there's a break between the last bullet and header

:toc: left
endif::[]

= Administering Jenkins on Kubernetes

In this section, we will look at:

* Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another.
* How to upgrade the version of Kubernetes in your cluster.

> * Upgrade Kubernetes cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project.

Reviewer 2: This should be a link to the Jenkins infrastructure documentation if it is included in this document at all.  We don't want to duplicate the infra team's documentation because then it needs to be maintained in two places.
```suggestion
```

> * Upgrade Jenkins Inside a Docker Container.

Reviewer 2: Don't upgrade Jenkins inside a container.  Define a new container with the new version, stop the old container, start the new container.
```suggestion
```

* Kubernetes Concepts.

== Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another:

Kubernetes (K8s) is an open-source system for automating deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications.

A Kubernetes cluster adds a new automation layer to Jenkins.
Kubernetes makes sure that resources are used effectively and that your servers and underlying infrastructure are not overloaded.
Kubernetes' ability to orchestrate container deployment ensures that Jenkins always has the right amount of resources available.

=== How to upgrade the version of Kubernetes in your cluster:

> Upgrading your Kubernetes cluster is one of the tasks you must take on as an operator of Jenkins X. 

Reviewer 2: Jenkins and Jenkins X are very different products.  The Jenkins X community is currently evaluating a name change in order to reduce confusion.

I believe that Kubernetes cluster upgrades are not typically the responsibility of a Jenkins administrator, unless that Jenkins administrator is also a Kubernetes administrator.  This sentence could either be removed or rephrased to note that the guidelines apply to Kubernetes administrators, but many Jenkins administrators also act as Kubernetes administrators.
```suggestion
```

> Kubernetes comes out with link:https://kubernetes.io/releases[new releases] regularly, and will only maintain releases for the three latest versions.

Reviewer 2: Phrasal verbs like "comes out", "get over", and "go under" can be more difficult for non-native speakers because they require two words to understand the verb.  Better to use a simple verb when we can.
```suggestion
Kubernetes delivers link:https://kubernetes.io/releases[new releases] regularly, and will only maintain releases for the three latest versions.
```

Therefore, if something breaks or there is a security issue on an older version, Kubernetes will not fix it, but ask you to upgrade.
All the major cloud providers only support a given set of latest versions.

> Jenkins X currently supports Kubernetes versions 1.20 and 1.21.
> Version 1.22 introduces a lot of deprecations, and is not fully supported yet.

Reviewer 2: I need help from the Kubernetes experts in the Jenkins community for this one.  I hesitate to state support for specific versions here because I believe it depends on the installation technique and the group of people maintaining that installation technique.  For example, I would expect that the helm chart maintainers would be the best ones to state the Kubernetes versions they test with the helm charts.  Likewise for those who maintain or adjust the YAML file definitions in the documentation.

@dduportal, @lemeurherve , and @smerle33 do you have ideas of better locations to declare the Kubernetes versions that are supported?
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: I don't see a reason to list supported version if the scope is Jenkins itself: it works on any version.

However, for the helm chart, then the kube version is mandatory to check (see the recent bugs with kube 1.25 and our helm chart).
Same for the kubernetes plugin.

I whole-hearthdly agree with what you said @MarkEWaite : it depends on the installation technique (see my other message above)

It is highly recommended to test upgrades on a separate cluster, where you have the same environment used in production.

* Run link:https://github.com/FairwindsOps/pluto[Pluto] to find any deprecated CRDs present in your cluster.
You can run Pluto on the cluster using 'pluto detect-helm' and on the files on your cluster repository using 'pluto detect-files'.

* Cross-check the list of deprecations you find using the list from link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-guide[Kubernetes], and see what is required for the Kubernetes version you want to upgrade to.

* Fix what needs to be fixed, and deploy the changes.

You may now start the upgrade of Kubernetes.
The process has two steps: 
. Upgrade the control plane.
. Upgrade the nodes. 

Follow the upgrade steps according to your cloud provider.
* link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html[Amazon]
* link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/upgrade-cluster?tabs=azure-cli[Azure]
* link:https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/upgrading-a-cluster[Google]
* Pour yourself a cup of your favorite drink while you sit back and wait for the magic to happen.

> === Upgrade Kubernetes Cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project:
> 
> *Requirements:*
> 
> * Create a link:https://issues.jenkins.io[Jira] ticket.
> 
> Announce on:
> * link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/status[Jenkins Status] page.
> * IRC, channel #jenkins-infra on freenode.
> * link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkins-infra[Jenkins Infrastructure and Dev Mailing list]
> * link:https://twitter.com/jenkinsci/[Twitter], in case of major upgrade.
> 
> Review Release Changelogs:
> * link:https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/CHANGELOG[Kubernetes]
> * link:https://github.com/Azure/AKS/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md[AKS]
> 
> Review and merge important pull request from link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/charts[jenkins-infra/charts].
> 
> Block k8smgmnt job on infra.ci
> 
> Pagerduty
> * Bump kubectl docker image link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/docker-helmfile[docker-helmfile] to the targeted kubernetes controller version.
> * Apply in the jenkins-infra/charts repo: https://github.com/jenkins-infra/charts/pull/1056.
> 
> Search for deprecated Kubernetes resources.
> * link:https://github.com/FairwindsOps/pluto[Pluto] running 'pluto detect-helm -owide'
> 
> NOTE: If you want to learn more about upgrades please link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/documentation/tree/main/maintenance/kubernetes[refer to this link]!
> 

Reviewer 2: I don't think that this belongs here, since it is described elsewhere.  It might be good to include a link to the other location, but not a copy of the text, since their content will drift from one another as time passes.
```suggestion
```

> == Upgrade Jenkins Inside a Docker Container:
> 
> First identify your image.
> 
> ----
> 
> $ docker ps --format "{{.ID}}: {{.Image}} {{.Names}}"
> 3d2fb2ab2ca5: jenkins-docker jenkins-docker_1
> 
> ----
> 
> Then login into the image as root.
> 
> ----
> 
> $ docker container exec -u 0 -it jenkins-docker_1 /bin/bash
> 
> ----
> 
> Now you are inside the container, download the 'jenkins.war' file from the official site link.
> 
> ----
> 
> # wget wget http://updates.jenkins-ci.org/download/war/2.176.1/jenkins.war
> 
> ----
> 
> Replace the version with the one that fits to you.
> 
> The next step is to move that file and replace the oldest one.
> 
> ----
> 
> # mv ./jenkins.war /usr/share/jenkins/
> 
> ----
> 
> Then change permissions.
> 
> ----
> 
> # chown jenkins:jenkins /usr/share/jenkins/jenkins.war
> 
> ----

Reviewer 2: Administrators should never, ever upgrade Jenkins from **inside** the container.  Software packages (like Jenkins) inside a container image should be considered immutable and should be treated as though they are immutable.  When it is time to upgrade Jenkins, it is time to prepare a new container image, pull the new container image into Kubernetes, stop the running container image, and start the new container image.

Please remove this section from the document.

Can you point me to the location where you found this recommendation?  We need to alert those people that this is a poor choice and leads to configuration management issues in the Jenkins configuration.
```suggestion
```

Author: I found this information while browsing the internet for making this document. 
https://gist.github.com/ricardo-dlc/1a6cbd9d48e4fa791b022b1eebc15de5

> 
> The last step is to logout from the container and restart it.
> 
> ----
> 
> $ docker restart jenkins-docker_1
> 
> ----
> 
> You can verify the update was successful by accessing your Jenkins url.
> 

Reviewer 2: Needs to be removed as well
```suggestion
```

:toc: left
endif::[]

= Administering Jenkins on Kubernetes

In this section, we will look at:

* Upgrading from one version of Kubernetes to another.
* How to upgrade the version of Kubernetes in your cluster.

> * Upgrade Kubernetes cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project.

Author: @MarkEWaite Should I remove the 'Upgrade Kubernetes cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project' from here?

> * Upgrade Kubernetes cluster maintained by the Jenkins Infrastructure project.

Reviewer 3: I'm sorry to drop in without having been part of the preliminaries phases but I have some difficulties to understand this content.

Why would you want to upgrade a Kubernetes cluster in regards to installing Jenkins?
As much as the section about Kubernetes concepts looks good by pointing to external resources, I feel the preliminaries here are not really helping a Kubernetes admin.

As a Kubernetes admin, I would start by looking at the installation method(s). In our case, the Jenkins Helm Chart is clearly the de-factor method: other methods are edge cases or not really common.

The prerequisites are not really related to the kubernetes version but more to storage (as a Jenkins constraint) and ingress (to access Jenkins).

What do you think?
